configuration-data-management
=============================

	Running multiple software projects in a company usually leads to configuration data management problems. How many times you missed an expensive deployment cycle due to an error in (one of) the configuration file(s)? A software company tipically maintains different deployment environments for different purposes like Development, Test, Acceptance, Stres test, Production, etc.
	Based on its purpose, each environment is configured different in terms of available resources so you will expect that each application maintains a list of configuration properties that are to be set with different values based on the target environment before the application is deployed. For example, your application will use a specific mail server in development to send emails and another one in production. Or, you might want to experiment different cache sizes in different environments, different thread pool settings, different database connection pool settings, etc. Some of the properties are read-only, others can be changed at runtime. Usually the places where applications are keeping the configuration data are subject of debate between developers. Some of them prefer the .properties files, others .xml's, others database tables and so on. There are some (usually complex) projects where you can encounter a mixture of all of this. Clear enought, there is no solution that fits all necessities that's why some configuration frameworks popped out (like Apache common configuration) trying to unify the way developers access the configuration data. And that's good. What is missing out in the picture is a consistent way to manage the configuration data itself in a common continuous integration environment.
	In large software organisations there are multiple roles supposed to do configuration data management, most of the time only partially. The range starts from the developers and goes to the infrastructure managers but covers also software architects and project managers. This ads a lot of complexity since there is no single person responsible for this task and moreover the persons are even in different organizational units within the same organisation. Take one example: due to a migration of one of the database production servers, the connection data related to one of the database server changed. The infrastructure manager will communicate the new data to each project team. In each team a person should be assigned to change the data wherever is necessary and create a new build than the build artefacts are moved into the target environment. The usual workflow based on manual interventions is slow and prone to errors. There are hundreds of configuration variables spreaded in multiple configuration files or even in databases. Combine this with multiple deployment environments and you will figure out why more that 90% of the initial deplyments fail during sanity tests due to a configuration issue. I've spend hours and days to figure out why a deployment failed and finally noticed that the destination queue parameter pointed to the test environment instead of the acceptance... And that happened due to a copy paste error. Not to mention that it was almost impossible to trace back the person responsible of doing the mistake. If people know that any configuration data change is traceable they will be far more carefull when they actually do it. It should be a way to compare old configurations with new configurations, to track the changes, to comment on them, to rollback the configuration to a previous version.

The idea of this project is to propose a consistent way to organize the configuration data within an organisation and to provide tools that can be used to automate the configuration data manipulation in a continuous integration environment. The following principles are considered valid and are the foundation based on which the solution is proposed:
	- configuration data is a resource produced and consumed by different entities at different levels within an organisation;
	- configuration data requires traceability - knowing what has been changed, when, who and why;
	- configuration data requires an automated notification system - any interested party on some configuration data wants to be notified pronptly when data changed
	- configuration data requires version management - with versions a configuration can be easily associated or integrated in a normal release management process;
	- it requires security - configuration data can be shared or private;
	- it requires easy automation - data should be stored in a standard format easy to be write and read by standard io libraries.
	- it should be easily read and write manually - configuration data is something that you might want to check and change on the spot in a terminal console, without running a dedicated application;
	In order to accomodate all this requirements a suitable data format for configuration data has to be choosed. XML is a good candidate because:
1. It's a popular format already used to store configuration data in a hierachical model;
2. It's easy to automate and in the same time it's human readible and editable;
3. XML files can be stored in existing versioning control systems. This will provide treaceability, version management and security without investing in expensive custom applications. Most of them have extensions that can provide also a notification system (notification on commit).
4. By using XML fragment specification (http://www.w3.org/TR/xml-fragment) different entities in the organisation can maintain authority on their part of the configuration without interfering with other entities. Than, each entity can assemble on the fly one XML file containing all the configuration data they need.
	An alternative could be a standalone system. It provides more power in terms of flexibility but with a huge cost on the implementation part, any feature mentioned here has to be implemented from the ground. My experience is that few organisations are willing to pay the price for a custom, inhouse developed system.

